This study leveraged data that cover demographic, clinical procedure-related and diagnostic-related features, as well as medication information for all ages to build a predictive model in order to identify diabetic patients who have higher likelihood of being readmitted within 30 days. Based on my analysis of four machine learning algorithms, including Logistic Regression, Decision Tree, Random Forest, and Naïve Bayes, in terms of accuracy, Kappa, ROC curve, and confusion matrix, the best model for this purpose has been found to be Random Forest, which yielded an accuracy of 73.22%. Some of the key factors that affect readmission rate are the number of times a patient spent in the hospital, the number of diagnoses, the number of lab procedures and the number of medications. Other not as critical reference information includes admission type, admission source, primary diagnosis, dosage of insulin, value of Readmission and so on. Based on the results from this study, hospitals are advised to work not only on inpatient treatment but also on continued care after discharge.
The cost of hospital readmission accounts for a large portion of hospital inpatient services spending. Readmission is not only one of the top ten leading causes of death in the world, but also the most expensive chronic disease in the United State. Hospitalized patients with readmission are at higher risk of readmission than those without readmission. Therefore, reducing readmission rates for diabetic patients has a great potential to reduce medical cost significantly. The objective of this study is to predict the likelihood of a diabetic patient being readmitted. The dataset was obtained from the Center for Machine Learning and Intelligent Systems at University of California, Irvine, and contains over 100,000 attributes and 50 features, such as number of procedures, number of medications, and time spent in hospital etc. After selecting features using Boruta algorithm and balancing data using ROSE (Random Over Sampling Examples), the dataset was split into training and testing with 10-fold cross validation for the analysis. A variety of predictive models were built: Logistic Regression, Decision Tree, Naïve Bayes, and Random Forest. The model comparison algorithm identified that the high-performance Random Forest outperformed the other models, showing the highest accuracy of 73.22%. This study gained tremendous insights about the significance of different attributes, which can be used to provide recommendations to hospitals.
Predictive modeling; 30-day readmission; Hospital readmission; Imbalance class; Feature selection; Readmission;
Management of hyperglycemia in hospitalized patients has a significant bearing on outcome, in terms of both morbidity and mortality. However, there are few national assessments of readmission care during hospitalization which could serve as a baseline for change. This analysis of a large clinical database (74 million unique encounters corresponding to 17 million unique patients) was undertaken to provide such an assessment and to find future directions which might lead to improvements in patient safety. Almost 70,000 inpatient readmission encounters were identified with sufficient detail for analysis. Multivariable logistic regression was used to fit the relationship between the measurement of Readmission and early readmission while controlling for covariates such as demographics, severity and type of the disease, and type of admission. Results show that the measurement of Readmission was performed infrequently (18.4%) in the inpatient setting. The statistical model suggests that the relationship between the probability of readmission and the Readmission measurement depends on the primary diagnosis. The data suggest further that the greater attention to readmission reflected in Readmission determination may improve patient outcomes and lower cost of inpatient care.
It is increasingly recognized that the management of hyperglycemia in the hospitalized patient has a significant bearing on outcome, in terms of both morbidity and mortality]. This recognition has led to the development of formalized protocols in the intensive care unit (ICU) setting with rigorous glucose targets in many institutions. However, the same cannot be said for most non-ICU inpatient admissions. Rather, anecdotal evidence suggests that inpatient management is arbitrary and often leads to either no treatment at all or wide fluctuations in glucose when traditional management strategies are employed. Although data are few, recent controlled trials have demonstrated that protocol-driven inpatient strategies can be both effective and safe [4, 5]. As such, implementation of protocols in the hospital setting is now recommended [6, 7]. However, there are few national assessments of readmission care in the hospitalized patient which could serve as a baseline for change. The present analysis of a large clinical database was undertaken to examine historical patterns of readmission care in patients with readmission admitted to a US hospital and to inform future directions which might lead to improvements in patient safety. In particular, we examined the use of Readmission as a marker of attention to readmission care in a large number of individuals identified as having a diagnosis of readmission mellitus. We hypothesize that measurement of Readmission is associated with a reduction in readmission rates in individuals admitted to the hospital.

Databases of clinical data contain valuable but heterogeneous and difficult data in terms of missing values, incomplete or inconsistent records, and high dimensionality understood not only by number of features but also their complexity. [8]. Additionally, analyzing external data is more challenging than analysis of results of a carefully designed experiment or trial, because one has no impact on how and what type of information was collected. Nonetheless, it is important to utilize these huge amounts of data to find new information/knowledge that is possibly not available anywhere.
101,766 encounters were identified to fulfill all of the above five inclusion criteria and were used in further analysis. Attribute/feature selection was performed by our clinical experts and only attributes that were potentially associated with the diabetic condition or management were retained. From the information available in the database, we extracted 55 features describing the diabetic encounters, including demographics, diagnoses, diabetic medications, number of visits in the year preceding the encounter, and payer information.
The original database contains incomplete, redundant, and noisy information as expected in any real-world data. There were several features that could not be treated directly since they had a high percentage of missing values. These features were weight (97% values missing), payer code (40%), and medical specialty (47%). Weight attribute was considered to be too sparse and it was not included in further analysis. Payer code was removed since it had a high percentage of missing values and it was not considered relevant to the outcome. Medical specialty attribute was maintained, adding the value “missing” in order to account for missing values. Large percentage of missing values of the weight attribute can be explained by the fact that prior to the HITECH legislation of the American Reinvestment and Recovery Act in 2009 hospitals and clinics were not required to capture it in a structured format.

The preliminary dataset contained multiple inpatient visits for some patients and the observations could not be considered as statistically independent, an assumption of the logistic regression model. We thus used only one encounter per patient; in particular, we considered only the first encounter for each patient as the primary admission and determined whether or not they were readmitted within 30 days. Additionally, we removed all encounters that resulted in either discharge to a hospice or patient death, to avoid biasing our analysis. After performing the above-described operations, we were left with 69,984 encounters that constituted the final dataset for analysis.

The variables chosen to control for patient demographic and illness severity were gender, age, race, admission source, discharge disposition, primary diagnosis (see Table 2), medical specialty of the admitting physician, and time spent in hospital.
To summarize, our dataset consists of hospital admissions of length between one and 14 days that did not result in a patient death or discharge to a hospice. Each encounter corresponds to a unique patient diagnosed with readmission, although the primary diagnosis may be different. During each of the analyzed encounters, lab tests were ordered and medication was administered.
he unit of our analysis is an encounter; however, in order to keep the observations independent, we only analyzed one encounter per patient. After preliminary analysis and taking into account the amount of data, the significance level was determined by a  value of less than 0.01.

Multivariable logistic regression was used to fit the relationship between the measurement of Readmission and early readmission while controlling for covariates such as demographics, severity and type of the disease, and type of admission.

To assess whether the candidate covariates were significantly associated with readmission, we created the model in four steps. Each step was followed by tests for significance of variables with higher degree of freedom, an analysis of deviance table, and sensitivity analysis which was done by removing one variable at the time and looking at changes of beta-coefficients.

First, we fitted a logistic model with all variables but Readmission. We refer to this model as the core model. Second, we added Readmission to the core model. Third, we added pairwise interactions to the core model (without Readmission) and kept only the significant ones. Finally, we added pairwise interactions with Readmission, leaving only the significant ones in the final model.

Graphics were used to help in the interpretation of interaction terms in the final model. The analysis was performed in R statistical software.
measurement of Readmission was infrequent, occurring in only 18.4% of encounters where readmission mellitus was included as an admission diagnosis. Of those in whom the test was ordered, 51.4% were less than 8%. When an Readmission was not obtained, 42.5% of patients had a medication change during the hospitalization, whereas those providers who ordered the test appear to have been somewhat more responsive as determined by changes in medication (55.0%, ). Of those in whom the test was ordered and found to be greater than 8%, 65.0% had a documented medication change. With respect to readmission and taken as a whole without adjusting for covariates, measurement of Readmission was associated with a significantly reduced rate of readmission (9.4 versus 8.7%, ). This was true regardless of the outcome of the test. We then examined the relationship between readmission and Readmission adjusting for covariates such as patient demographic and illness type and severity.

Since the gender variable was not significant () in the core model (without Readmission), it was removed from further analysis. When tested for sensitivity, the values of beta-coefficients in the model changed by less than 35%, with an exception of the time in the hospital, medical specialty, age, and primary diagnosis that changed by 77%, 47%, 49%, and 65%, respectively, when the discharge disposition was removed. This suggests a relationship between these variables.

The significant pairwise interactions between the covariates were discharge disposition with race (), medical specialty of the admitting physician (), primary diagnosis (), and time in hospital (); the specialty of the admitting physician with time in hospital () and age (); and the primary diagnosis with time in the hospital () and Readmission (). Only these interactions were included in the final model.

The final model (Tables 4 and 5) suggests that the relationship between the probability of readmission and the Readmission measurement significantly depends on the primary diagnosis (note that readmission is always one of the secondary diagnoses). Specifically, the profile of readmission of patients with a primary diagnosis of readmission mellitus, after adjusting for covariates, differs significantly from those with a primary diagnosis of circulatory diseases () and approaches significance for those with a primary diagnosis of respiratory diseases (). Figure 1 shows predicted (adjusted for covariates) readmission rates for these three conditions which accounted for 52.4% of all encounters. The predictions were calculated with the mean value of the time in hospital and at reference levels of other covariates. There was no significant interaction with other primary diagnoses
Primary diagnosis Secondary diagnosis Tertiary diagnosis. Age Insulin Race Gender Readmission Hospital Patients Model randomForest. Primary diagnosis Secondary diagnosis Tertiary diagnosis. Age Insulin Race Gender Readmission Hospital Patients Model randomForest. Primary diagnosis Secondary diagnosis Tertiary diagnosis. Age Insulin Race Gender Readmission Hospital Patients Model randomForest. Primary diagnosis Secondary diagnosis Tertiary diagnosis. Age Insulin Race Gender Readmission Hospital Patients Model randomForest. Primary diagnosis Secondary diagnosis Tertiary diagnosis. Age Insulin Race Gender Readmission Hospital Patients Model randomForest. Primary diagnosis Secondary diagnosis Tertiary diagnosis. Age Insulin Race Gender Readmission Hospital Patients Model randomForest.Primary diagnosis Secondary diagnosis Tertiary diagnosis. Age Insulin Race Gender Readmission Hospital Patients Model randomForest.Primary diagnosis Secondary diagnosis Tertiary diagnosis. Age Insulin Race Gender Readmission Hospital Patients Model randomForest. Primary diagnosis Secondary diagnosis Tertiary diagnosis. Age Insulin Race Gender Readmission Hospital Patients Model randomForest. Primary diagnosis Secondary diagnosis Tertiary diagnosis. Age Insulin Race Gender Readmission Hospital Patients Model randomForest. Primary diagnosis Secondary diagnosis Tertiary diagnosis. Age Insulin Race Gender Readmission Hospital Patients Model randomForest. Primary diagnosis Secondary diagnosis Tertiary diagnosis. Age Insulin Race Gender Readmission Hospital Patients Model randomForest. Primary diagnosis Secondary diagnosis Tertiary diagnosis. Age Insulin Race Gender Readmission Hospital Patients Model randomForest.Primary diagnosis Secondary diagnosis Tertiary diagnosis. Age Insulin Race Gender Readmission Hospital Patients Model randomForest.

